.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" libspectrum.3: libspectrum summary
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2018 Philip Kendall
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
.\" 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
.\"
.\" Author contact information:
.\"
.\" E-mail: philip-fuse@shadowmagic.org.uk
.\"
.\"
.TH libspectrum 3 "1st July, 2018" "Version 1.4.4" "Emulators"
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH NAME
libspectrum \(em Sinclair ZX Spectrum support library
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I libspectrum
is a library for reading and writing some of the file formats used by
emulators of the Sinclair ZX Spectrum. It also contains routines
providing information about the various Spectrum clones which were
available.
.PP
The file formats currently supported by
.I libspectrum
are:
.IP \(bu 2
Snapshots: .z80, .szx, .sna (all read/write), .zxs, .sp., .snp and +D
snapshots (read only).
.IP \(bu 2
Tape images: .tzx, .tap, .spc, .sta, .ltp (read/write) and .pzx, Warajevo .tap,
Z80Em and CSW version 1 (read only).
.IP \(bu 2
Input recordings: .rzx (read/write).
.IP \(bu 2
Disk images: .dsk (both plain and extended), .d40, .d80, .fdi, .img, .mgt,
\[char46]opd, .sad, .scl, .td0, .trd and .udi (identification only).
.IP \(bu 2
Timex cartridges: .dck (read only).
.IP \(bu 2
IDE hard disk images: .hdf (read/write).
.IP \(bu 2
Microdrive cartridge images: .mdr (read/write).
.PP
Additionally, any files compressed with
.IR bzip2 "(3),"
.IR gzip "(3)"
or
.IR zip "(3)"
can be read and will be transparently decompressed.
.PP
Full documentation for
.I libspectrum
is provided in
.RI ` libspectrum.txt '.
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR bzip2 "(3),"
.IR fuse "(1),"
.IR fuse\-utils "(1),"
.IR gzip "(3),"
.IR zip "(3)."
.PP
The comp.sys.sinclair Spectrum FAQ, at
.br
.IR "http://www.worldofspectrum.org/faq/index.html" .
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
Philip Kendall (philip\-fuse@shadowmagic.org.uk)
